JUDY WOODRUFF: The collapse of
the Republicans' push on health
care raises serious questions
about the road ahead for
reform, key among them, will
the Democrats come to the table?
To explore that and more,
we are joined now by Senator
Bernie Sanders of Vermont.
He is the ranking member on
the Senate Budget Committee.
Welcome back to the
"NewsHour," Senator Sanders.
So, what happened to your
Republican colleagues?
What went wrong?
SEN.
BERNIE SANDERS (I), Vermont:
Well, what went wrong, Judy, is
they brought forth a disastrous
health care bill that had the
support of all of 12 percent
of the American people, that
was opposed by the American
Medical Association,
the American Hospital
Association, the AARP.
And virtually every national
health care organization
understood that, when
you throw 22 million
people off of health insurance,
when you cut Medicaid by $800
billion, when you raise premiums
for older workers, when you
defund Planned Parenthood, and
you make it almost impossible
for people with preexisting
conditions to get the health
care they need and can afford,
you know what?
You have got a bill
that's a stinker, it
shouldn't go anyplace.
And it didn't go anyplace.
And that's a good thing
for the American people.
And I thank the millions
of people who stood up
and fought back and said
that that legislation
is not what this
country is about.
JUDY WOODRUFF: So, when the
president -- he did criticize
today the Republicans, but he
also blamed Democrats
and he said Democrats
are obstructionists.
They're only about obstructing.
SEN.
BERNIE SANDERS: Well, if he
wants to blame me for helping
kill that bill, I accept that
responsibility completely.
This bill was an
absolute disaster.
Its goal was primarily to give
tax breaks to the rich and
to large corporations, rather
than to address the needs
of the American people.
If the president wants
to blame me and anyone
else for preventing 22
million Americans losing
their health insurance,
I accept that criticism.
JUDY WOODRUFF: So,
we're hearing, Senator
- - our Lisa Desjardins
was reporting the plan
now is if the vote for a pure
repeal goes down, which it's
expected to, the next step
is to go to committees, go
back to what is called regular
order, to work with Democrats.
Are you and others
Democrats prepared to
work with Republicans?
SEN.
BERNIE SANDERS: Of course.
Why not -- look, nobody
has said, Judy, that the
Affordable Care Act is
anywhere near perfect.
It did add 20 million
more people to the
ranks of the insured.
That's good.
Deductibles, however,
are too high.
Co-payments are too high.
Premiums are too high.
And we pay by far the highest
in the world for prescription
drugs, getting ripped off
every day by the
pharmaceutical industry.
So, if the Republicans want
to sit town and say how do we
improve the Affordable Care
Act, not destroy it, how
do we improve it, let's
go forward and do that.
I have some very
specific ideas on that.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Well,
let's talk about that,
because, realistically,
you know where many
of the Republicans are.
We know where the Democrats,
you and others, are.
Where's the middle ground here?
Where do you see a
place for compromise?
SEN.
BERNIE SANDERS:
Well, I'll tell you.
As I just mentioned, the cost
of prescription drugs in this
country is far, far higher than
in any other country.
You may recall that Donald Trump
as a candidate for president
talked about how he was going
to take on the pharmaceutical
industry and it was going to
lower prescription drug costs.
Well, we have some
ideas to do that.
Republicans may
have other ideas.
Let's talk about lowering
prescription drug costs,
saving the federal
government substantial
sums of money.
Let's talk about having
Medicare negotiate prices with
the pharmaceutical industry.
That's number one.
Number two, there are areas of
this country right now where
there are no insurance companies
offering the
Affordable Care Act.
Let us provide a public option
in every county in America, so
if people don't like what the
private insurance companies
are offering or there is no
offer, let them have at least
a public option.
Number three, I believe that
the American people would
very much like to see lowering
the eligibility age of
Medicare from 65 to 55.
And, lastly, in my view --
and I speak only for myself
-- the United States must join
the rest of the industrialized
world, guarantee health care
to all people as a right.
And that is why I will be
introducing a Medicare-for-all
single-payer programs.
It will not be passed, believe
me, in this session of Congress.
I know that.
But we have got to begin the
discussion as to why we spend
so much more per capita on
health care than any other
nation, why we pay the highest
prices in the world, why we
do not guarantee health
care to all people, as every
other major country does.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Well, let me
ask you about what is going
to happen in the meantime.
You mentioned
prescription drug prices.
You mentioned having a
public option in different
parts of the country.
But we know it's the case
that, in many states,
there is no insurance
company that is providing
coverage.
The Republicans like
to say the market, the
exchanges are collapsing.
What can be done in
the short term, Senator
Sanders, to shore these up?
Is there a way to come up
with subsidies that both
parties can agree to?
SEN.
BERNIE SANDERS: Oh, yes.
Well, Judy, I think --
it's not me talking.
This is what the insurance
companies are saying.
What they're saying is,
there's great instability
in the marketplace,
precisely because of tweets
like the one President -- the
president sent out today: Let's
see the Obamacare act destroyed.
Well, that's not exactly a
strong sign of confidence going
out to the insurance companies.
So, what we have got to do
is, number one, we have to
enforce the individual mandate.
We're losing a lot of money that
is not coming into the system.
And, number two, we have
to deal with cost-sharing,
which is something we
have been doing many,
many years.
If you do that, I think
you will stabilize the
market for the short term.
But long term, longer term, we
have to improve the Affordable
Care Act, and longer term than
that we have to join the rest
of the world and guarantee
health care to all people as
a right.
JUDY WOODRUFF: How much more
money is the federal government
going to have to put into
health care in order
for this to work?
SEN.
BERNIE SANDERS: Well,
that's a very good question.
And I'm sure that there's
absolutely nobody in the world
who knows the answer to it.
All that I can say is that
we are spending far more per
capita than people in any other
country, and our health care
outcomes are in many cases worse
in terms of life expectancy,
infant mortality and so forth.
So, I think the issue is
not necessarily -- we may
have to spend more money.
The issue is to trying to figure
out why we end up spending so
much more than other countries.
And one of the reasons, clearly,
high cost of prescription drugs.
Second reason, we do
very, very badly in terms
of primary health care.
There are millions of people,
even those who have insurance,
who can not get to a doctor
when they are sick.
They end up in the emergency
room, very expensive.
They end up in the hospital,
very, very expensive.
If we greatly expanded primary
health care, lower the cost
of prescription drugs, we take
a giant step forward in lowering
health care costs in America.
JUDY WOODRUFF: So, very quickly,
if you had to name one area
where you could see an early
agreement between Democrats
and Republicans on health
care, what would it be?
SEN.
BERNIE SANDERS:
Prescription drugs.
JUDY WOODRUFF: All right,
we are listening to you,
Senator Bernie Sanders.
Thank you very much.
SEN.
BERNIE SANDERS: Thank you, Judy.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And, tomorrow
night, we are going to get a
Republican perspective, and
that will from Senator
Roger Wicker of Mississippi.